Document triggering navigation (#4756)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/view-transitions.mdx

<header transition:animate={myFade}> ... </header>
```

## Router control

The `<ViewTransitions />` router handles navigation by listening to:

- Clicks on `<a>` elements.
- Backwards and forwards navigation events.

The following sections discuss how you can further control when navigation occurs within the router.

### Preventing client-side navigation

> There are some cases where you cannot navigate via CSR, since both pages involved must use the `<ViewTransitions />` router to prevent a full-page reload. You may also not want client-side routing on every navigation change, and would prefer a traditional page navigation on select routes instead.

Reviewer: I believe both the commas here can be removed
```suggestion
There are some cases where you cannot navigate via CSR since both pages involved must use the `<ViewTransitions />` router to prevent a full-page reload. You may also not want client-side routing on every navigation change and would prefer a traditional page navigation on select routes instead.
```

You can opt out of client-side routing on a per-link basis by adding the `data-astro-reload` attribute to any `<a>` tag. This attribute will override any existing `<ViewTransitions />` component and instead trigger a browser refresh during navigation.

The following example shows preventing client-side routing when navigating to an article from the home page only. This still allows you to have animation on shared elements, such as a hero image, when navigating to the same page from an article listing page:

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
<a href="/articles/emperor-penguins" data-astro-reload>
```

```astro title="src/pages/articles.astro"
<a href="/articles/emperor-penguins">
```

> Links with the `data-astro-reload` attribute will be ignored by the router and a full page navigation will occur.

Reviewer: We previously used "full-page" (with a hyphen), which I believe is the most correct, I would change this here so we are all on the same page (see what I did here? ~~I am sorry~~) about which wording to use.
```suggestion
Links with the `data-astro-reload` attribute will be ignored by the router and a full-page navigation will occur.
```

Reviewer 2: Yan is correct! I'll take this comment out of my pending review comments.  :smile:

### Trigger navigation

You can also trigger client-side navigation via events not normally listened to by the `<ViewTransitions />` router using `navigate`. This method from the `astro:transitions/client` module is available in any client script or client component.

The following example shows using an option selected by a site visitor to trigger navigation: 

```js title="form.js" "navigate(href)"
import { navigate } from 'astro:transitions/client';

// Navigate to the selected option automatically.
document.querySelector('select').onchange = (ev) => {
  let href = ev.target.value;
  navigate(href);
};
```

The `navigate` method takes these arguments:

- `href` - The new page to navigate to. This must be a URL to a page within your own domain. Any external links will trigger redirection.
- `options` - An object with the following properties:

>     - `history` - Either `'push'`, `'replace'`, or `'auto'`. When the option is `'push'` the router will use `history.pushState` to create a new entry in the browser history. If the option is `'replace'` it will use `history.replaceState` which will update the URL without adding a new entry into navigation. The `'auto'` option will also do a `history.pushState` in most cases, but if the URL is not one that can be transitioned to, it will not throw and the current URL will remain with no changes to the browser history.

Reviewer: We can make this sentence a bit less verbose.
```suggestion
    - `history` - Either `'push'`, `'replace'`, or `'auto'`. When the option is `'push'` the router will use `history.pushState` to create a new entry in the browser history. If the option is `'replace'` it will use `history.replaceState` which will update the URL without adding a new entry into navigation. The `'auto'` option will also do a `history.pushState` in most cases, but if the URL cannot be transitioned to, it will not throw and the current URL will remain with no changes to the browser history.
```

Reviewer 2: Resolving this, since I've rewritten for readability! Thanks for noticing this could be improved, Yan!

## Replace entries in the browser history

Normally, each time you navigate, a new entry is written to the browser's history. This allows navigation between pages using the browser's `back` and `forward` buttons. For view transitions, it is possible to suppress history entries by using the `data-astro-history` attribute with the `replace` value on normal anchors. This is useful for pages that should not be navigated back to, such as a confirmation page. 

> The following example navigates to the `/main` page, but does not add a new entry to the browsing history. Instead, it reuses the current entry in the history and overwrites it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example navigates to the `/main` page but does not add a new entry to the browsing history. Instead, it reuses the current entry in the history and overwrites it.
```

<header transition:animate={myFade}> ... </header>
```

## Router control

The `<ViewTransitions />` router handles navigation by listening to:

- Clicks on `<a>` elements.
- Backwards and forwards navigation events.

> The following sections discuss how you can further control when navigation occurs within the router.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following options allow you to further control when navigation occurs within the router:

- `astro-data-reload`: an `<a>` tag attribute to force a full-page navigation
- `astro-data-history="auto | push | replace"`: an `<a>` tag attribute to control the browser's history
- `navigate(href, options)`: a method available to any client script or client component to trigger navigation
```
I think this is the introduction to the section I was wanting! Now, the sub sections below can be more usage based and we don't as easily lose these options inside specific user activities.

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
<a href="/articles/emperor-penguins" data-astro-reload>
```

```astro title="src/pages/articles.astro"
<a href="/articles/emperor-penguins">
```

Links with the `data-astro-reload` attribute will be ignored by the router and a full-page navigation will occur.

### Trigger navigation

You can also trigger client-side navigation via events not normally listened to by the `<ViewTransitions />` router using `navigate`. This method from the `astro:transitions/client` module is available in any client script or client component.

The following example shows using an option selected by a site visitor to trigger navigation: 

```js title="form.js" "navigate(href)"
import { navigate } from 'astro:transitions/client';

// Navigate to the selected option automatically.
document.querySelector('select').onchange = (ev) => {
  let href = ev.target.value;
  navigate(href);
};
```

The `navigate` method takes these arguments:

- `href` - The new page to navigate to.

> - `options` - An object with the following properties:
>     - `history`: `'push'` | `'replace'` | `'auto'`
>     	- `'push'` the router will use `history.pushState` to create a new entry in the browser history. 
>     	- `'replace'` it will use `history.replaceState` which will update the URL without adding a new entry into navigation.
>     	- `'auto'` option will also do a `history.pushState` in most cases, but if the URL is not one that can be transitioned to, it will not throw and the current URL will remain with no changes to the browser history.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `options` - An object with the following properties:
	- `history`: `'push'` | `'replace'` | `'auto'`
		- `'push'`: the router will use `history.pushState` to create a new entry in the browser history. 
		- `'replace'`: the router will use `history.replaceState` to update the URL without adding a new entry into navigation.
		- `'auto'` (default): the router will attempt `history.pushState`, but if the URL is not one that can be transitioned to, the current URL will remain with no changes to the browser history.
```

Reviewer 2: edited wording and hoping formatting works

> ## Replace entries in the browser history

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Replace entries in the browser history
```
This feels like it should be a sub-heading under Router Control

> Normally, each time you navigate, a new entry is written to the browser's history. This allows navigation between pages using the browser's `back` and `forward` buttons. For view transitions, it is possible to suppress history entries by using the `data-astro-history` attribute with the `replace` value on normal anchors. This is useful for pages that should not be navigated back to, such as a confirmation page. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Normally, each time you navigate, a new entry is written to the browser's history. This allows navigation between pages using the browser's `back` and `forward` buttons. 

The <ViewTransitions /> router allows you to overwrite history entries by adding the `data-astro-history` attribute to any individual `<a>` tag.

The `data-astro-history` attribute can be set to the same three values as the [`history` option of the `navigate()` function](#trigger-navigation): 

`data-astro-history`: `'push'` | `'replace'` | `'auto'`
- `'push'`: the router will use `history.pushState` to create a new entry in the browser history. 
- `'replace'`: the router will use `history.replaceState` to update the URL without adding a new entry into navigation.
- `'auto'` (default): the router will attempt `history.pushState`, but if the URL is not one that can be transitioned to, the current URL will remain with no changes to the browser history.

The following example navigates to the `/main` page but does not add a new entry to the browsing history. Instead, it reuses the current entry in the history (`/confirmation`) and overwrites it.

```astro title="/confirmation.astro"
<a href="/main" data-astro-history="replace">
```

Now, when navigating back from the `/main` page, the browser will not display the `/confirmation' page, but the page before it.

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
<a href="/articles/emperor-penguins" data-astro-reload>
```

```astro title="src/pages/articles.astro"
<a href="/articles/emperor-penguins">
```

Links with the `data-astro-reload` attribute will be ignored by the router and a full-page navigation will occur.

### Trigger navigation

You can also trigger client-side navigation via events not normally listened to by the `<ViewTransitions />` router using `navigate`. This method from the `astro:transitions/client` module is available in any client script or client component.

The following example shows using an option selected by a site visitor to trigger navigation: 

```js title="form.js" "navigate(href)"
import { navigate } from 'astro:transitions/client';

// Navigate to the selected option automatically.
document.querySelector('select').onchange = (ev) => {
  let href = ev.target.value;
  navigate(href);
};
```

The `navigate` method takes these arguments:

> - `href` - The new page to navigate to.
> - `options` - An object with the following properties:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `href` (required) - The new page to navigate to.
- `options` - An optional object with the following properties:
```

Normally, each time you navigate, a new entry is written to the browser's history. This allows navigation between pages using the browser's `back` and `forward` buttons. 

The `<ViewTransitions />` router allows you to overwrite history entries by adding the `data-astro-history` attribute to any individual `<a>` tag.

The `data-astro-history` attribute can be set to the same three values as the [`history` option of the `navigate()` function](#trigger-navigation): 

`data-astro-history`: `'push'` | `'replace'` | `'auto'`
- `'push'`: the router will use `history.pushState` to create a new entry in the browser history. 
- `'replace'`: the router will use `history.replaceState` to update the URL without adding a new entry into navigation.
- `'auto'` (default): the router will attempt `history.pushState`, but if the URL is not one that can be transitioned to, the current URL will remain with no changes to the browser history.

The following example navigates to the `/main` page but does not add a new entry to the browsing history. Instead, it reuses the current entry in the history (`/confirmation`) and overwrites it.

```astro title="/confirmation.astro"

> <a href="/main" data-astro-history="replace">
> 
> The following example navigates to the `/main` page but does not add a new entry to the browsing history. Instead, it reuses the current entry in the history and overwrites it.
> 
> ```astro title="/confirmation.astro"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

The following example shows using an option selected by a site visitor to trigger navigation: 

```js title="form.js" "navigate(href)"
import { navigate } from 'astro:transitions/client';

// Navigate to the selected option automatically.
document.querySelector('select').onchange = (ev) => {
  let href = ev.target.value;
  navigate(href);
};
```

The `navigate` method takes these arguments:

- `href` - The new page to navigate to.
- `options` - An object with the following properties:
	- `history`: `'push'` | `'replace'` | `'auto'`
		- `'push'`: the router will use `history.pushState` to create a new entry in the browser history. 
		- `'replace'`: the router will use `history.replaceState` to update the URL without adding a new entry into navigation.
		- `'auto'` (default): the router will attempt `history.pushState`, but if the URL is not one that can be transitioned to, the current URL will remain with no changes to the browser history.

### Replace entries in the browser history

Normally, each time you navigate, a new entry is written to the browser's history. This allows navigation between pages using the browser's `back` and `forward` buttons. 

> The <ViewTransitions /> router allows you to overwrite history entries by adding the `data-astro-history` attribute to any individual `<a>` tag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `<ViewTransitions />` router allows you to overwrite history entries by adding the `data-astro-history` attribute to any individual `<a>` tag.
```

`data-astro-history`: `'push'` | `'replace'` | `'auto'`
- `'push'`: the router will use `history.pushState` to create a new entry in the browser history. 
- `'replace'`: the router will use `history.replaceState` to update the URL without adding a new entry into navigation.
- `'auto'` (default): the router will attempt `history.pushState`, but if the URL is not one that can be transitioned to, the current URL will remain with no changes to the browser history.

The following example navigates to the `/main` page but does not add a new entry to the browsing history. Instead, it reuses the current entry in the history (`/confirmation`) and overwrites it.

```astro title="/confirmation.astro"
<a href="/main" data-astro-history="replace">

The following example navigates to the `/main` page but does not add a new entry to the browsing history. Instead, it reuses the current entry in the history and overwrites it.

```astro title="/confirmation.astro"
<a href="/main" data-astro-history="replace">
```

This has the effect that if you go back from the `/main` page, the browser will not display the `/confirmation' page, but the page before it.

> The values (`auto`, `push`, `replace`) and behavior of the `data-astro-history` attribute are the same as for the [`history` option of the `navigate()` function](#trigger-navigation). `auto` is the default if the `data-astro-history` attribute is omitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

<header transition:animate={myFade}> ... </header>
```

## Router control

The `<ViewTransitions />` router handles navigation by listening to:

- Clicks on `<a>` elements.
- Backwards and forwards navigation events.

The following sections discuss how you can further control when navigation occurs within the router.

### Preventing client-side navigation

There are some cases where you might want to not navigate via CSR. A transition will only occur when both the old and new page has the `<ViewTransitions />` component. There may be cases where you want a nice animation coming from one page, such as going from an article listing page `/articles` to an article detail page `/articles/emperor-penguins`, but you don't want an animation when coming from somewhere else on the site.

> In these cases, you can opt out of client-side routing on a per-link basis using the `data-astro-reload` attribute like so:

Reviewer 3: I agree that the need to have `<ViewTransitions>` at both ends is part of the top of the page.

Instead of 
> Astro provides a `<ViewTransitions>` routing component that can be added to the `<head>` of a single page to control page transitions when you navigate to another page. 

we could say:
> Astro provides a `<ViewTransitions />` routing component that can be added to the `<head>` of any page. The view will transition seamlessly when you navigate between two pages that both contain the <ViewTransitions /> component.

> In these cases, you can opt out of client-side routing on a per-link basis using the `data-astro-reload` attribute like so:

Author: Yeah, this is an improvement, can move this piece of information as part of a refactor.

```html
<a href="/articles/emperor-penguins" data-astro-reload>
```

These links will be ignored by the router and a full page navigation will occur.

### Trigger navigation

> There may be occasions when you need to trigger a navigation imperatively, such as via an event that occurs within JavaScript. The `astro:transitions/client` module provides a method for doing this. In any client script or client component you can use the module like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also trigger client-side navigation via events not normally listened to by the `<ViewTransitions />` router using `navigate`. This method from the `astro:transitions/client` module is available in any client script or client component.

The following example shows using an option selected by a site visitor to trigger navigation: 
```
Improve the description as needed, but we do always try to describe what the code is doing so that "like this" isn't left up to the reader!

```js title="form.js" "navigate(href)"
import { navigate } from 'astro:transitions/client';

// Navigate to the selected option automatically.
document.querySelector('select').onchange = (ev) => {
  let href = ev.target.value;
  navigate(href);
};
```

> The `navigate` method takes these arguments:
> 
> - `href` - The path to the page you wish to navigate. The href must be to within the same origin. Any external links will trigger redirection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `navigate` method takes one argument:

- `href` - The new page to navigate to. This must be a relative URL to a page within your own domain. Any external links will trigger redirection.
```
I can see that more options are planned, but if there's only one, we should really say one.  :smile: 

And, the example above doesn't make it clear what the format should be because the content of the link is actually in a selected value. If someone were writing a path directly, would it be a relative URL like a normal link? (e.g. `/about/`) I think more explanation is necessary for this.

Reviewer 3: The href does not have to be relative. It can be absolute, it can even be complete with protocol, host & post. 
And while it may be too complicated to explain here, I suppose it can even have a different origin without triggering a reload if the target page has the correct CORS headers.

Suggestion:
The `navigate` method takes one argument:
- `href` - The new page to navigate to.

If an error occurs while loading the target page, the navigate function falls silently back to a normal browser load with no view transitions. Typical errors are:
* The document cannot be loaded due to an invalid `href`
* The document is not an HTML document
* The target page does not define `<ViewTransitions/>`
* The target page and the current page do not have the same origin (protocol, host, port) and there are no other measures to support CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing).

Author: We are going to have other options, so I'll go ahead and add them here.

Author: These have been added now, and the wording on `href` updated.
